The notion that reading is a skill is one that many take for granted. A few years ago I attended the World Memory Contest in New York and had a chnace to talk to one of the finalist at the conclusion of the competition--a 3rd place finisher.  He started practicing and got into the "sport" less than a year prior. 

He offered some advice on prepration and winning that dovetails well with Johnson's discussion about the difference between the natural and inherent capacity for spoken language and the corresponding nuerological and physical developent of our brains versus the need to learn to read. He, the Memory Competition finalist, argued that the skills we must learn and learn from an early age we take for granted once we arrive at a place of "mastery" or functional proficiency.  

Reading is a perfect example.  Most people, upon learnign to read enough to complete a novel or book achieve a level of comfort or contentment in their reading such that they never intentionally push the limits of comfort for reading.  For example, they rarely push themselves to read in a way or at a pace that compromised thier contextual understanding, comprehension or their recall at the cost of speed.  This though, is precisely the method he used in learning to memorize a deck of cards. It involved using a scheduled scheduled beep at a 5 second interval as a trigger to flip a card from a deck, scan it, commit it to memory and repeat, for a deck of 52.  He then gradually decreased the duration of the intervals untill he was not only uncomfortable but unable to sucessfully recall the current card but also unable to stitch together the order of the current and previous card or 2 cards. 

He worked at 4 seconds untill that became resonably but still sligthly uncomfortable, and then graduated to 3 second intervals, using the adaptations to the new rate to both improve recall and also strengthen the patterns firing in his mind for stitching together a narrative of what the card represented and how that representation connected to the previous card or whatever it was represented by and the previous card to it.  In this way, he described, he was teaching his mind to quickly generate a long iterative narrative or story.   

He applied a similar process to increasing his reading speed as the contest included events that timed and tested the ability to read, comprehend and recite text or prose as quickly and accurately as possible.  This process helped prime him for not only not seeing the commmon connector words like "is" "and" "or", "the" that Johnson points out, but it also trained how he used his periferal vision when reading and, cirtically, how and where on the page he focused his eyes and their rate of movement. 

This process for improving his reading speed and his ability to quickly memorize the order of a deck of cards is an apt metaphor for how I think about how good design leverages the innate capacities, and shortcomings of the human brain when faced with a task.  Help the task-doer move through thier narrative as quickly as possible. 

